---
title: Vibe-coding an academic website
date: 2025-11-13
excerpt: And how you can, too.
---

> I expect this post might change in the future: there's a lot to talk about here, and I have received a lot of interest in understanding how to use AI to make a personal website. For now, here is a brief primer.

Managing your online presence is important, *especially* when you are on the job market. You better believe that the first thing a hiring committee is going to do if they like your CV is to Google your name. If your website is the first hit, then that is a great way to make a good online impression. There's probably a lot to be said for having a website to attract grad students, too. When I was looking at grad programs, if I thought a professor was a potentially good fit, the next thing I did was Google that person, too.

So, here's a post highlighting how you can do this with AI. If there is one thing large language models are good at, it is writing code that are largely boiler-plate. Because so many people have made academic websites before, you can bet AI is going to do a pretty good job. While I am suspicious about AI's use for other things, this is one thing that I found actually pretty delightful. AI made a good looking, mobile-friendly, and dynamic website.

# Disclaimer
Before going down the route of making a website using AI, it really does help to know some basics of web development. You should know what CSS, HTML, and JavaScript do, and you should be comfortable reading these languages (although you probably don't need to be an expert in them). Also, I make a few design choices here, and it helps to understand why I make them. I have a bit of web development experience, so taking this approach is admittedly easy for me. If you are not willing to spend 1-2 hours learning the very basics of JavaScript and React, then this is very likely to end up being a headache to manage in the long-term. There are no-code solutions for making a website -- but you may find these cause their own headaches, too.

# Set up
When setting up your website, you should think about how you want to manage it. That is, how are you going to add content, test it out to make sure it looks good, and grow the codebase in a logical way.

I made some design choices here which I thought made sense. In this section, I discuss my thinking.

## React
I wanted a single-page, dynamic site. This means that one the webpage is loaded, the browsing experience is smooth. React is a lightweight JavaScript framework for doing this. 

Check out the brief tutorial [here](https://react.dev/learn).

# Deployments

# The hard part: content
The cool thing about using AI for this website is that the friction for actually deploying the website is very small. I went from no code to a website in an afternoon, and the bulk of that time was actually just thinking about content. As of this writing, there is still not that much content on this site. 


# Next steps?
I would love for people to be able to comment on my posts. However, once we go from having a single web page, manageable via GitHub-Pages to a potential website where people are going to be reacting and communicating, this architecture might not cut it. Also, I don't want to moderate a comment section.

