---
title: On the problems of statistical validity
date: 2026-01-14
excerpt: Case studies from psychedelic research...
---

Psychedelics promise to offer mental health patients a range of benefits, with studies showing positive outcomes for treating patients with addiction, depression, and PTSD [1]. Earlier on in my career, we (my advisors and I) contemplated whether such treatment could offset some of the negative effects on mental health due to extreme heat and air pollution exposure. 

However, psychedelic research is plagued by a number of statistical problems which cast doubt on these purported benefits. My advisor mentioned this to me this morning, and I figured it presented a good case study for reviewing statistical validity more broadly. According to a review [2], psychedelic science suffers from four general problems:

1. Internal validity
2. External validity
3. Construct validity
4. Statistical conclusion validity

I will explain each of these problems, and provide examples from this review to illustrate the point.
## Internal validity
An internally valid study is one which reliably assesses the causal relationship between the treatment and the outcome.

Psychedelic research often suffers from internal validity problems due to the lack of effective placebos or the so-called *breaking blind* problem, in which treatments/controls may be randomly allocated to individuals, but the individual ultimately figures out which group they are in.

This could be one of the hardest problems for advancing psychedelic research. Typically, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold standard for assessing causality, but such a design is difficult to achieve in the absence of control groups. This is particularly difficult when populations self-select into a study and have prior experience with psychedelics. To overcome this problem, more sophisticated experimental designs may be needed (e.g., a design to assess dose-response).
## External validity
External validity indicates the ability of a study to provide results which generalize to a larger population. In psychedelic research, individuals may self-select into trials, populations are overwhelmingly WEIRD (white, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic), and there is scant evidence to make long-term conclusions on long-term efficacy.

This last point seems particularly problematic. Patient outcomes are not measured on the same time-scales as the mental disorders themselves. If a patient is depressed for years, it is insufficient to measure effects for mere hours or days following treatment. If a patient feels euphoria for hours or days following treatment, but there is no follow up in the months thereafter, we cannot say that the results generalize for long-term patient care.

The solution to these problems is to conduct studies on larger, diverse cohorts over longer time periods.
## Construct validity
Does an experiment measure what it claims to measure? In other words, do the results indeed present evidence to support conclusions? Construct validity seems a bit more abstract than internal or external validity, but this problem pops up all the time. For example, the SAT/ACT may be criticized as an inaccurate assessment of intelligence (outcomes do not necessarily correlate with all aspects of intelligence). However, this is not exactly what the SAT/ACT measures, but rather it measures to some extent test preparedness, 

In psychedelic science, the biggest threat to construct validity comes from a lack of clear understanding on the mechanism affecting the brain's response. Without an understanding of this mechanism, it is impossible to measure whether treatments have a desired effect.
## Statistical conclusion validity
This problem seems like the most common problem in science today, and comes from a result of either unintentionally or intentionally mis-interpreting statistical results. Often, scientists make conclusions which exaggerate the statistical evidence, or they fail to adequately discuss limitations.

In psychedelic research, this problem seems most salient due to studies with small sample sizes, or where there are multiple comparisons. This multiple comparisons problem recently came up in a project I'm working on, and it seems like an easy problem to inadverdently overlook. If multiple statistical tests are run on the same dataset, statistical significance becomes more likely through random chance. 

Solutions to this problem might include: encouraging publication of null-findings; to evaluate results over larger sample sizes; and to pre-register studies beforehand (so the results can be compared with the intended statistical test).
## Conclusions
I recommend reading the full review paper for more specifics. There are some interesting tidbits about unique issues encountered in psychedelic science. Notably, I find the term "Pollan" effect, in which media hype affects patient expectations, to be disturbing. I love Michael Pollan's books, but it's worth considering what effect his journalism has on the ultimate success of the clinical treatments he purpotedly advocates.Generally, these statistical validity problems present relevant considerations for all science, so it's worth revisiting them when starting new projects.
# References
1. Soylemez KK, de Boo EM, Susuzlu A, Lusher J. The Role of Psychedelics in Contemporary Psychological and Interdisciplinary Inquiry. J Pers Med. 2025 Sep 28;15(10):450. doi: 10.3390/jpm15100450. PMID: 41149813; PMCID: PMC12565330.
2. van Elk M, Fried EI. History repeating: guidelines to address common problems in psychedelic science. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol. 2023 Sep 25;13:20451253231198466. doi: 10.1177/20451253231198466. Erratum in: Ther Adv Psychopharmacol. 2024 Jan 10;14:20451253231223609. doi: 10.1177/20451253231223609. PMID: 37766730; PMCID: PMC10521293.

